Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 induces lung alveolar epithelial cell migration  and proliferation, protects from apoptosis, and represses mitochondrial oxygen consumption. 
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a devastating lung disorder of unknown etiology. Although its pathogenesis is unclear, considerable evidence supports an important role of aberrantly activated alveolar epithelial cells (AECs), which produce a large variety of mediators, including several matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), which participate in fibroblast activation and lung remodeling. MMP-1 has been shown to be highly expressed in AECs from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis lungs although its role is unknown. In this study, we explored the role of MMP-1 in several AECs functions. Mouse lung epithelial cells (MLE12) transfected with human Mmp-1 showed significantly increased cell growth and proliferation at 36 and 48 h of culture (p &lt; 0.01). Also, MMP-1 promoted MLE12 cell migration through collagen I, accelerated wound closing, and protected cells from staurosporine- and bleomycin-induced apoptosis compared with mock cells (p &lt; 0.01). MLE12 cells  expressing human MMP-1 showed a significant repression of oxygen consumption ratio compared with the cells with the empty vector. As under hypoxic conditions  hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) mediates a transition from oxidative to glycolytic metabolism, we analyzed activation of HIF-1α. Ηigher activation of this factor was detected in MMP-1-transfected cells under normoxia and hypoxia. Likewise, a significant decrease of both total and mitochondrial reactive oxygen  species was observed in MMP-1-transfected cells. Paralleling these findings, attenuation of MMP-1 expression by shRNA in A549 (human) AECs markedly reduced proliferation and migration (p &lt; 0.01) and increased the oxygen consumption ratio. These findings indicate that epithelial expression of MMP-1 inhibits mitochondrial function, increases HIF-1α expression, decreases reactive oxygen species production, and contributes to a proliferative, migratory, and anti-apoptotic AEC phenotype. 
