Serum concentrations of Krebs von den Lungen-6, surfactant protein D, and matrix  metalloproteinase-2 as diagnostic biomarkers in patients with asbestosis and silicosis: a case-control study. 
BACKGROUND: Asbestosis and silicosis are progressive pneumoconioses characterized by interstitial fibrosis following exposure to asbestos or silica dust. We evaluated the potential diagnostic biomarkers for these diseases. METHODS: The serum concentrations of Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6), surfactant protein D (SP-D), and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), MMP-7, and MMP-9 were measured in 43 patients with asbestosis, 45 patients with silicosis, 40 dust-exposed workers (DEWs) without pneumoconiosis, and 45 healthy controls (HCs). Chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) images were reviewed by experts blinded to the clinical data. According to the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the ideal level of each biomarker and its diagnostic  sensitivity were obtained. RESULTS: The serum KL-6 and MMP-2 concentrations were highest in patients with asbestosis, particularly in comparison with those in DEWs and HCs (P&lt;0.05). The serum SP-D concentration was significantly higher in patients with asbestosis than in patients with silicosis, DEWs, and HCs (P&lt;0.01), whereas no significant difference was noted among patients with silicosis, DEWs, and HCs. No significant difference in the serum MMP-7 or -9 concentration was found among patients with asbestosis, patients with silicosis, DEWs, or HCs. Among patients with asbestosis, the serum KL-6 concentration was significantly correlated with the lung fibrosis scores on HRCT and negatively correlated with the forced vital capacity (FVC) % predicted and diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) % predicted. The serum SP-D and MMP-2 concentrations were negatively correlated with the DLCO % predicted (all P&lt;0.05). The order of diagnostic accuracy according to the ROC curve was KL-6, SP-D, and MMP-2 in patients with asbestosis alone and in the combination of both patients with asbestosis and those with silicosis. The combination of all three biomarkers may increase the possibility of diagnosing asbestosis (sensitivity, 93%; specificity, 57%) and both asbestosis and silicosis (sensitivity, 83%; specificity, 62%). CONCLUSIONS: KL-6, SP-D, and MMP-2 are available biomarkers for the adjuvant diagnosis of asbestosis and silicosis. The combination of all three biomarkers may improve the diagnostic sensitivity for asbestosis and silicosis. 
